('<center> <iframe width="500" height="320" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/-ke1vH4_rQc"> </iframe> </center>', " If you look at our current technological systems, they're obviously nowhere near where our minds are. They're very different. And one of the biggest questions for me is, what's the difference between where we are now and where we need to be if we want to build minds, if we want to build systems that are generally intelligent and self-motivated and maybe self-aware? And of course, the answer to this, we't know because if we knew we'd already done it. But there are basically several perspectives on this. One is our minds as general learning systems that are able to model arbitrary things including themselves. And if they are this, they probably need a very distinct set of motivations, needs, things that they want to do. I think that humans get their specifics due to their particular needs. We have cognitive and social and physiological needs and they turn us on who we are. Our motivations determine where we put our attention to and what we learn and what we actually do in the world, what we model, how much we perceive, what we are conscious of. In a similar sense, it might be that it's sufficient to build a general learning architecture and combine this with a good motivational system. And we are not there yet that we have built a general learning architecture. For instance, our minds can learn and create new algorithms. They can be used to write code and invent code, programming code for instance, or the rules that you need to build a shop and run that shop if you're a shopkeeper, which is some kind of programming task in its own right. We don't know how to build a system that is able to do this yet. It involves for instance that we have systems that are able to learn loops and we have some techniques to do this, for instance a long short-term memory and a few other tricks, but they're nowhere near of what people can do so far. And it's not quite clear how much work needs to be done to extend these systems into what people can do. It could be that it's very simple, it could be that it's going to take a lot of research. The dire view, as was more the traditional view, is that human minds have a lot of orthogonal complexity, that we need to build a lot of functionality into it, like in Minsky's Society of Mind, to get to all the tricks that people are up to. And if that is the case, then it might take a very long time until we have recreated all these different functional mechanisms. But I don't think that it's going to be so dire, because our genome is very short, and most of that codes for a single cell. Very little of it codes for the brain. And I think a cell is much more complicated than a brain. A brain is probably largely self-organizing and built not like clockwork but like a cappuccino. So you mix the right ingredients and then you let it percolate and then it forms a particular kind of structure. So I do think because nature pulls it off pretty well in most of the cases that even though a brain probably needs more complexity than a cappuccino, dramatically more, it's going to be much simpler than building a very complicated machine like a cell. you", '4.883470773696899')