('<center> <iframe width="500" height="320" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/LJLxDVigHQA"> </iframe> </center>', " Thank you very much. We are a tiny bit behind time, but that is only because we started 10 minutes late. I am obviously in desperate trouble with Roger for allowing it to go late, but I was trying to explain that this is San Diego and we are very relaxed. I hope that is okay. If we get our speakers up on stage, Dwi'n gobeithio bod hynny'n iawn. Felly os ydyn ni'n cael ein hysgrifennwyr ar y stage, a allwch chi sefyll ar y stage? Ac fe wnawn ni ddweud ychydig o gwestiynau sy'n eich arloesu. Mae gennym ni ddau o micau sy'n ymlaen, ydyn ni? Ac, pam nad dwi ddim yn cymryd ddau o gwestiynau wrth i ni gysylltu â phobl, ac rydw i'n ceisio cofio nhw, ac yna dwi'n gallu eu sgrifennu yn ôl, ac felly, y dynion yng nghymru, dyw eich gwestiwn ddim yn gofyn i mi, ac yna dwi'n mynd i'w ymdrechu unwaith i gael ein hysgrifennwyr i gyd. So the gentleman in the black, why don't you ask the question to me and then I will deal with it once we've got all our speakers here. Just to ask Roger if he's got any statement in the first one of the private consciousness. Yes. Right, okay, got that one. Another one? Gentleman in the white. Yes, I found it interesting with Nevin's presentation. I've thought about this a long time myself, the difference between pleasure and pain. It occurs to me, and I'd like you to comment, that it's somewhat like dissonance, in other words pain. And pleasure is more like consonance. It's almost like a musical analogy. And one more question, I'll stack up and then I'll start divvying them out Musical analogy gentlemen. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, this is question for dr. Penrose Do you think that the laws of the universe is the consciousness or awareness of the universe? is the consciousness or awareness of the universe, taking the fact that every space and time, moment of time in the universe is aware of these laws? Itself? No. I mean, the universe as a whole, not in my opinion. I mean, you could imagine such a thing. But in my opinion, consciousness comes about when the proto-consciousness is organized, orchestrated, in a way, in relation to the first question, which I don't have any clear idea about, I'm afraid. So I don't think the universe as a whole is conscious. It would need to... Can I repeat the question? Sorry? I think I can answer the question, because the question got changed. Oh, I see, the question's changed. My God. Can you repeat the question? Sorry? I think I can answer the question because the questions are changed. Oh, I see. The question's changed. My question is that since the universe is aware of the laws, every moment of time and space knows the laws of conservation are to be true, does that mean it's awareness, let's forget the consciousness, is the universe aware of its laws constitute the awareness of the universe? Not in my terminology. I mean the universe as a whole is not in view, aware of anything. It's not that's aware, it's just an aspect of consciousness, in my view. I mean, it's not the whole of consciousness, but it's some aspect of it. So no, I mean, we'd have to, the view is that you have to have this reduction, spontaneous reduction, and this spontaneous reduction is just an element of proto-consciousness. y byddwch yn rhaid i chi gael y rhedeg, y rhedeg spontân, ac y rhedeg spontân yw dim ond un o'r proto-consciousness, nid y byd y byd yn gyfan, mae'n digwydd mewn leoedd. Felly, dydw i ddim yn gweld bod y cyfrifiad o'r cwestiwn yn iawn, mewn fy nghefn i. Felly, roedd y cwestiwn cymdeithasol yn ymwneud â'r eang a'r bobl, yn ymwneud â chymued, neu rhywbeth fel hynny. to what extent is pleasure and pain similar to music or some sort of thing like that? So why don't I give that to Harmut and then you can. Yeah, I felt I went already out on a limp proposing that relaxing to a stable state feels pleasant and going to an excited state is unpleasant. It just struck me that this fits together with a number of observations or logical constraints. So pushing it beyond, it would be, I don't know, maybe somebody comes up with sort of a measurement protocol, how we could assess, I mean, obviously it cannot be such a subtle phenomenon in the human nervous system and as of course all sorts of studies what happens when you eat a cookie, but sort of breaking it down to at what are the systems that really correlate with a pleasant sensation that we are still far from that. I think pleasure is a learning signal. It's created whenever you feel a need and it's proportional to the amount of need fulfillment that you do per unit of time. With respect to music, the pleasure that's generated from music has many possible dimensions. One of them is aesthetic. You have a certain structured discovery that possibly piggybacks on some of the functionality that we have for learning language. Then there are physiological parameters that might be elicited by music, that you entrain your physiological rhythms and your brain patterns with the music, which itself can be intrinsically pleasant. Then there are social connotations that go with music, narrative connotations and so forth. They can fulfill many, many different needs and this means that music can be intrinsically pleasant if you are susceptible to one of those needs. This question is regarding neural networks. So we have been talking about deep neural networks. So as we understand that it is a basic computing unit, and we also talked in morning about microtubules. So can microtubules be considered as basic computing unit, which can act, which can, you know, the quantum effect can be implemented using it. And the third part is that when we talk about the concepts, biologically these are electrical spikes. How do concept translate to these electrical spikes? So I think the question is, is a neuron a computing unit and how does a neuron represent concepts? That's right. Gosh, is there anyone up here who'd like to answer that question? We don't have any neurologists up here, remember? Who would like to, Joscha, come on, you can do that one. I don't think that concepts are represented by individual neurons. They are represented by ensembles of neurons and I suspect, and this is not saying that it's completely consensus yet, because there are a multitude of theories on how that works, that concepts form a map that is something like the address space of your sensory motor scripts, of the things that produce your mental representations. And concepts are synchronized between speakers through language, which is why we can use statistical analysis of language to do machine translation. These machine translations work only on conceptual structures, nothing below this. They cannot imagine what the concept means. The concept is basically what anchors different linguistic symbols that are synonyms on some part of a landscape. And this landscape is a map that is produced and held stable by a multitude of different neurons that are working together and forming circuits and oscillators. Does this answer your question? Excellent. Middle back there. I have another question for you. So in your model, what do you think the difference between consciousness and self-consciousness, or let's say self-awareness, in your model? What is the difference? What's the difference between awareness and self-awareness? Who are you asking the question to? Oh, I don't remember, but the middle. Yosha, right, okay. So self-awareness, the same as awareness of other things. Yeah, let's say we have the awareness or consciousness about pain and the awareness that you are the one that has this pain, no? Okay. I think when you meditate, you can discover that your awareness of yourself can be redirected on the awareness of something else. So for instance, you might identify as a perspective being as the universe itself if you lose the connection dissociated to your self concept. Which means to identify, for instance, as a human being or as a social person or as somebody who wants something and so on is somewhat arbitrary. It's a trick that the mind uses to make a particular kind of model and regulate that model. And you can change that model into becoming aware of that you are the universe. And you have the illusion that there is a cosmic consciousness because suddenly your representation of the universe gets unified with what you think is your perspectivity on it. But this is a mental state. There is a difference between this perspective self and the awareness of having a consciousness, of having conscious access. And the awareness of consciousness doesn't need to have content. It's the awareness of the fact that there, or a model of the fact that there is a process that accesses your own models. there is a process that accesses your own models. Yeah, question was, is self-awareness the same as awareness of the world? Did I have that right? I mean, the same kind of thing, I would say. But self-aware, I mean, I'm just gonna make a stupid obvious comment. Self-awareness is awareness of oneself, and awareness of the world is awareness of the world. They're just different, the awareness is the same, a gwneud ymdrechion gwirioneddol. Mae'r awyreniaeth ei hun yn awyreniaeth unwaith ac mae'r awyreniaeth o'r byd yn awyreniaeth o'r byd. Mae'r awyreniaeth yn y mêl, ond mae'r pethau gwahanol sydd ar gael. Iawn. Dylunio i chi. Felly, y cwestiwn nesaf. A oes un arall gan Hartmut? Hartmut? Iawn. Yeah. Hamid? OK. I was confused by your observation three, where you said that it would be worthwhile to replace the top layers of a neural network with a quantum computer. I would have expected the exact opposite. For example, when we do transfer learning, we remove the top layers of a neural network and replace it with an SVM, for example, okay? So why is my intuition wrong? Why wouldn't it be that you would want the quantum computer to discover better features, for example? For example, if you were to find, I'd say what we have done, we have done like little numerical tests for simulated quantum neural networks and then we found, for example, that we could learn something like subset parity to a much larger number of inputs than a classical neural net. Essentially, the classical neural net would have to be larger to do the same thing. It would have more parameters, and therefore it takes longer time to learn. So if you were to find, let's say a mapping from 50 input units to just one output unit, for certain types of learning tasks, works much better on a quantum neural network, for better meaning, for example, lower sample complexity, you need less training samples, then you can easily use this in a much bigger context by letting the lower level tasks, you can easily use this in a much bigger context by letting the lower level tasks, such as feature extraction, be done by the early layers of your neural network. I'm not saying this is the only way to do it, but this would be a very straightforward way. Often, deep neural networks, even though they might have thousands of output units, they are often, if you use something like logistic regression, essentially each output neuron fights for itself, and there are sort of these funnels that end in single neurons on the output layer, so it's just a very straightforward way to use a quantum neural network here and now, as soon as we discover, even on a 50 input quantum neural net net some advantages. Okay, so your observation was basically about efficiency and speed rather than better features, right? That particular observation. Yeah, in the moment I'm just after efficiency and speed. Okay, thank you. Another question for Roger maybe? Just a, okay, gentleman on the blue, Thank you. Another question for Roger maybe? Okay, gentleman on the blue, one in from the green, and then maybe you can negotiate between you as to whether you've got the same question or a different question. My question was for Roger. Roger, I don't understand what your post-collapse wave function looks like. If you look at the spontaneous collapse theories developed by Philip Perle and Jurani Remedie and Weber and so forth, if you have a particle which initially starts out, it is confined to one dimension of space and it initially starts out in a superposition of two Gaussians, where those Gaussians are located in separate places along the dimension of space, then the post-collapse wave function is still a superposition of two Gaussians. One is just raised and the other is lowered. And there are technical reasons for why they have to settle for this, but what it means is that the post-collapse wave function is still always a superposition. In the literature that's called the tails problem. So I'm wondering what the post-collapse wave function looks like on your theory, because it looks to me that if your post-collapse wave functions also have tails, then you can never Atau koe o teori tūhoe, kia koe o teori tr ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I ddod o hyd i'r ffyrdd. I d deall y pwynt ar y diwedd. Dwi'n gwybod eich ffysigaeth yn ddiddorol, felly dyna'n sgwrs dros cop o goffi. Diolch yn fawr am hwn. Y dynion y grin yng nghanol? Mae gennym dyn ar y cwp. Mae'n cwestiwn i Roger a phob un arall, a byddwn yn ei sefydlu mewn cyfnod. Mae'r cwest o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o'r rhan o ond bydd yn edrych ar y ffyrdd o ddewis a modelau ddewis. Dyna'r cwestiwn. Nawr rydw i'n ei sefydlu mewn cyfnod. Yn ffisiologaeth dynol, byddai'r holl bethau o'r cyfrifoldeb. Byddai'r holl bethau o'r rheoliadau dynol, sy'n golygu y bydd y dynol yn ymwneud ag ymgyrchu, ac mae'r cyfrifoldeb yn golyion yw anoddbwysedd, ac mae ffysiog ymdrechion, sy'n anoddbwyseddau criti'r, yn gysylltiad â physiogau clasig neu physiogau gwantum. Felly, pam rydych chi'n ymwneud â physiogau gwantum? Rydw i'n mynd i gysylltu â'r cwestiwn hwn. Oes gennych chi cwestiwn? Iawn. Felly, rwy'n mynd i gyd i gysylltu â'r cwestiwn hwn. Rwy'n credu y bydd y bobl ar y pânel, ynghylch i mi, yn siarad am ffysigau clasig neu quanta. Dwi'n credu y dylai hynny fod yn iawn. Rhodra'n dweud bod ffysigau clasig a quanta yn ddifrifol. Mae rhywbeth yn mynd i mewn i'n myfyrwyr a byddai'n angen modific, yw'n dweud bod rhywbeth yn mynd ymlaen yn ein gofynnau a bydd yn arwain at adnodd i ffysiga chwantum, fel y gwyddom ar hyn o bryd, sy'n gwneud gwirionedd ddim yn ffysiga chwantum fel y gwydom ar hyn o bryd. Felly rydyn ni'n ceisio addasu un ffeatu addas. Ie, rwy'n teimlo'r ffordd. Ie, rwy'n meddwl, y ffordd rwy'n ei gael yw bod ffysiga chwantum a ffysiga clasig yn ymgyrchion i beth dydyn ni ddim yn gwybod ar hyn o bryd. is that classical physics and quantum physics are both approximations to something that we don't know yet. We get some idea of what it's like, but we need to have a better theory than either one or the other. It's true that in many circumstances, you can treat it according to quantum physics or according to classical physics, because the other part doesn't play much of a role, but yes, there's something more, as James was just saying, and the something more would have as limiting cases our current view of quantum mechanics or our current view of classical general relativity. And so one has a more inclusive theory. It's not that you have one or the other, you have the bigger theory which may specialize in some circumstances to look like quantum physics or in other circumstances to look like classical physics. I think the other two, it'd be interesting to see what the, what... I think it's a very interesting division between us. It's completely correct to say that you are trying to go beyond current physics. You try to make an extension to physics, which is very bold because we don't have data in this particular area. It's more conceptual. We don't know what that is going to be yet. Physics at the moment assumes that the world is made from quantum fields that evolved to some kind of Hamiltonian, or another mathematical formalism that comes down to something that is mathematically equivalent but written down in a different way. And it could be that we change that, but we don't know about this. And for us, the question is what kind of computation is facilitated in this universe or outside of this universe, and what kind of computation do we need to build the equivalent of minds? Roger thinks we need computation that goes beyond the computation that is known in physics. I think the classical computation is probably sufficient. You think that classical computation is probably sufficient but it's going to be much faster with quantum computation, right? Why don't you hand the microphone to Harmut and he can answer that question. So maybe first I want to make a bit of an upbeat observation in the sense that what we observe is that quantum information has given fields of physics that previously were not talking to each other much a common language. So suddenly people who wonder about the information paradox of black holes and wonder what happens if you throw a qubit into a black hole which is entangled with another qubit that's outside of the event horizon, or condensed matter physicists, or quantum biology folks, they can all look at each other's equations now and understand to some degree what the other is doing. So I think that bodes very well for the next 10 years seeing interesting fusions of areas of physics. But of course the fundamental part of your question is more, naya, this may be a bad excuse, but we just take baby steps. Quantum physics is what I have now, what I somewhat understand, and we can build machines based on this theory. I'm not by any means saying this is the end of it. And of course, history of science would suggest that in probably 50 years we will talk about maybe David Deutsch's new constructor theory or completely other forms of physical theory. I don't know, but it's likely. Gentleman in the hat, who's obviously got a burning question. Final comment. Hello. Instability physics is completely non-computational. Thank you. Gentleman in the hat. Hi. I know that most of us here and most of the discussion around artificial intelligence seeing as we are human beings the model that we have in mind the Holy Grail is to replicate the human mind but seeing as there are so many different forms of intelligence on this planet is there a benefit to the development of artificial intelligence looking at non-human forms of animal problem-solving and other forms of intelligence? So this would be squirrels and crows and dolphins and ants and bees and are there situations where non-human forms of intelligence may be able to complete tasks better than a human based AI? You got the microphone? The main form of artificial intelligence will not be robots that are existing on the same level of us. The main form of AI will be organizations. It will be corporations, nation states, universities, whatever needs compute to make sense of what it's doing. And we will be living inside of AI largely, not next to it. It's not going to be robots that compete with us for resources. It's going to be stuff where we are going to be mostly the microbiome. Of course, there's also going to be intelligent artifacts, but it makes probably more sense to imagine robots as the extremities of future AI. In this sense, we should not expect AI to be very similar to human AI. Personally, I'm interested in building humanoid AI because I want to understand how we work. I'm also interested for the same reason in animal-like AI because I'm interested in how minds work in general. But in practice, if you are able to build sentient machines, they are going to be organizational things, mostly. And Roger, we've talked about whether squirrels or dogs were conscious or intelligent, you know? Yes, well I think the way I look at this question is that the reason that AI seems to be trying to Well compete is perhaps the wrong word with human intelligence is because that's what it's trying to do I mean, it's trying to play chess or go or whatever it happens to be or or do things that human beings do and Maybe sometimes try to do them better than humans do it. And we're not so interested in trying to do machines that do things better than squirrels. But I don't see why you shouldn't study that. It's just, you wouldn't get so much money, I suppose, for studying AI for squirrels. But it seems to me, it's just, this is the way it's driving and that's why AI is aimed, I don't think it's at all like what humans, the way we think or what we do. I think what we think and what we do is much more like Dyma ffordd y mae'n ei hirio, ac dyna pam mae AI yn ei amgueddfa. Dwi ddim yn credu bod y ffordd rydyn ni'n meddwl yn unig yn yr un ffyrdd. Rydyn ni'n meddwl y bydd y ffordd rydyn ni'n meddwl yn unig yn yr un ffyrdd. Ond dyna efallai ddim y cwestiwn. Ac, Hartmut, pan fydd eich mechyd AI, neu'ch mechyd computing, yn groeso ac yn gwneud eu llwybr, byddant yn edrych fel unigol, neu'n sgwrl, neu'n dda, neu dim unig fel nhw? and they become very powerful, will they look anything like a human being or a squirrel or a dog or nothing like them? First of this question actually, when I wrote my PhD on autonomous mobile robots, the strategies we used to have them navigate through our institute and find back, let's say there's a power station that was very much modeled after how ants or rats navigate or simpler systems, or sorry, simpler animals that was very fashionable at the time. And I'm still a big fan of looking sort of at, I think, for example, the intelligence of a single cell is way underappreciated, I think. If you look in evolutionary periods, I think a single cell is probably the most optimized machinery, and I would like us to think more what amazing feats, or what it would take to replicate the amazing feats of a single cell. Big fan of this. In terms of quantum AI, I think I made in my talks as a case that I'm convinced that the most, I think creativity can be well described by, or formalized by finding a low point in an objective landscape that expresses an optimization landscape. And quantum enhanced optimization will be better in finding those low-lying minima and hence will be the most creative system we know to build to date. So I have no doubt about that. One important point is maybe think about the difference between a dog and a human. What is that difference between a dog mind and a human mind? One of the obvious differences is given by the affordances of the dog. The dog doesn't have hands. It has much better smell than humans. And this means that the world presents itself very different to a dog. The next thing, a dog has different needs. The social needs and the cognitive needs of a dog are very different. As a result, it's going to pay attention to very different things, and it means it learns very different things, because you only learn things that give you reward signals, and you only pay attention to those things that capture your attention, because you have a need that is related to them. And then the largest and maybe most important difference is that our development is much, much slower, and our brain is slightly larger than the one of a dog, which means during our adolescence, during the training phase of our brain is slightly larger than the one of a dog, which means during our adolescence, during the training phase of our brain, we receive vastly more training data than the dog's brain. So we get to much better abstraction than a dog can possibly can get to. So. So, do you have one more last thing to say on that point? No. No? Well, I think we're at time. So is there one more burning question out there that someone feels must be asked or answered today? A really bad, the gentleman right at the back there that hasn't spoken so far. I have a question for Janos, and I'm wondering if he feels a current modern digital computer could ever become conscious running a software program? Oh, well, that's that's the and that's the topic isn't it? And if not, what what hardware would be required to make a computer conscious? What hardware would we need well to make a computer conscious? So Roger Penrose would say well, you need to take advantage of Roger Penrose bydd yn dweud... Wel, mae angen i chi ddod o hyd i'r reduction o statwm gwantum. Nid yw'n cwestiwn o ddefnyddio dealltwriaeth ddeallwriaeth yn y ffordd rydyn ni'n ei ddefnyddio nawr. Mae angen i chi ddod o hyd i rhai pethau sy'n ymgyrchu... Yn ymwneud ag... Rwy'n credu mai oedd y peth cyntaf o'r cwestiwn ddegawd, a ddim gael cyfathrebu'n llai. Yn enwedig, byddai angen i to, namely you would have to, on my view, have a way of taking advantage of what's going on in quantum state reduction. See at the moment, it's very hard even to see the effect at all in an experiment, so we're way off it, but without doing that, in my view, we don't have consciousness at all. So in my view, none of the devices, artificially intelligent devices, computer-driven devices, have any consciousness at all. Unlike us, something is going on in our brains which involves, on the view I hold, the reduction of the quantum state and that being correlated, orchestrated over large areas of the brain, a'r ffaith bod hynny'n cael ei ymgyrchu, drwy ardalau gwahanol o'r ddau, ac byddai hynny, ar ystod hwn, yn cyflawni sylwadau. Ond rydym ni'n ymwneud â hynny'n fawr iawn ar hyn o bryd. Dydyn ni ddim yn gwybod, o ran brofesiynau ffysigol, bod y proses rydw i'n siarad amdano mewn gwirionedd. Dymunwn ni bod rhaid i rai pethau ddigwydd yn y rhedeg y dynion quanta, ond dydyn ni ddim yn gwybod beth sy'n digwydd. exists, we know that something must happen in the reduction of the quantum state, but we don't know exactly what's happening. And Joshua, do you think a computer could just do it? You only got like a one sentence answer here. Roughly a year ago, I taught a class at MIT about the future of AI and I took a small survey in that class on what kind of hardware do we need to build a mind that is capable of human performance and consciousness and so on, I think most of us felt that consciousness is going to be naturally emerging as soon as the system starts to model its own attention properly. And the capacity for doing that, the majority of the class was quite optimistic, we thought we can probably run a person on 200 gigabytes if we only knew how. We don't know how, we are pretty optimistic with respect to this, but we have some reason to believe that these numbers might already be sufficient. We had a couple students that thought we need petabytes and we had one student that thought we need exabytes, but they were the outliers. Roger, a quantum gravity computer, Joshua, a big enough computer, and are you undecided at the moment? No, but you're asking the wrong person. Computer, Joshua, ein Computer ist zu groß genug. Bist du gerade nicht überzeugt? Nein, aber du fragst die falsche Person. Ich persönlich, meine Sichtweise ist eher eine psychische Sichtweise. Ich denke, dass das Bewusstsein mit Elementen der Physik verbunden ist. Wir sollten uns mehr über Masse, Spin oder vielleicht auch um die Reduktion des Staates denken, wie Roger es vorgibt. a chanfodd, os ydych chi'n meddwl amdanyn nhw, o ran mass, spin neu efallai, status-dewis, fel sy'n sylweddoli Roger, ym mhob ffordd, yw'r sylweddol perifatig, mae'n ymwneud â'r grain o salt, neu'r sal, byddwn yn dweud, yw yna rai protoconsiaid sydd yno. So, sort of the wrong question, you don't know a machine would do it, the universe sort of kind of is. May I just make a slight objection to the term quantum gravity computer? Yes, of course. Because, first of all, it's not quantum gravity, because the term quantum gravity means the correct application of, I mean, the application of what we regard as current quantum mechanics to gravitation theory, whereas this is almost the opposite. It's gravitational quantum mechanics. I don't know how you say that. Yes, sorry, I shouldn't have baited you innny. Dwi ddim yn ddweud hynny. Dwi ddim yn dweud hynny. Ond, ie, dylai fod yna ddwyrion ar gyfer hyn. Ie, dyna ddwyrion ar gyfer ddwyrion ar gyfer ddwyrion ar gyfer y computer quanta relativista neu'r computer quanta modif. Gadewch i ni siarad amdano. Diolch i bawb, dyna'r diwedd. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.", '15.512680530548096')